blog: Add "components on Kubernetes with wasmCloud" blog (#521)
wasmCloud/wasmCloud.com: blog/2024-07-30-how-to-run-webassembly-components-on-kubernetes-with-wasmcloud/index.mdx

---
title: "How to run WebAssembly components on Kubernetes with wasmCloud"

> image: './images/webassembly-components-on-kubernetes.png'

Reviewer: This doesn't seem to resolve for me on the blog page

Reviewer: <img width="626" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/70648936-b8be-49cb-92df-392c048d5d3d">

Author: Hmm, I'm getting the same thing, but I'm not sure what's causing it. Any ideas @lachieh ?

Reviewer 2: very odd, will investigate after lunch, ETA ~1hr

Reviewer 2: Fixed in #527

**WebAssembly components** are made for cloud native environments: 

* As WebAssembly binaries, components are truly agnostic to OS and architecture.  
* Teams can compile components from their language of choice, then combine and interoperate&mdash;across languages&mdash;with other components via standard APIs. It's like building blocks. 
* Components are orders of magnitude more efficient than containers, setting the stage for major cost, speed, and sustainability improvements.

With components, teams can write code in the language of their choice and run it anywhere...including in places where even containers are impractical. If your organization is already using Kubernetes, it's easy to run components on your clusters with **wasmCloud**. In fact, wasmCloud can help you extend Kubernetes to tackle traditional challenge areas like multi-cloud and edge. 

In this tutorial, you'll learn how to get started running WebAssembly components on Kubernetes in **three simple steps**. The whole process should only take about five minutes.

{/* truncate */}

### How does wasmCloud work with Kubernetes?

> One way to think of wasmCloud is as **Kubernetes for WebAssembly**. We sometimes describe it as a "**Wasm-native orchestrator**": a distributed applications platform built from the ground up for WebAssembly workloads.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At a high level you can think of wasmCloud is as **Kubernetes for WebAssembly**. We describe it as a "**Wasm-native orchestrator**": a distributed applications platform built from the ground up for WebAssembly workloads.  
```

Reviewer: Removing the `sometimes` is the real request there, and the other was hopefully honing in on what we want to say here around the orchestration bits of wasmCloud

What does all of this mean in practice?

1. Developers can move faster, reusing building blocks written against well-known APIs. 
2. It's easy to run distributed apps in resource-constrained environments at the edge. 
3. You can use wasmCloud's connectivity layer to connect Kubernetes clusters across different clouds or regions.
4. Workloads can be scheduled dynamically across regions and clouds. 

By unlocking the power of distributed components, wasmCloud extends Kubernetes as well. Let's jump in and see how it works.

## Get started with wasmCloud on Kubernetes

In this tutorial, we'll get wasmCloud up and running on a local Kubernetes cluster. You'll need [Helm](https://helm.sh/) and a Kubernetes cluster running on your machine. It also helps to install [wasmCloud Shell (`wash`)](/docs/installation), though it's not strictly necessary.

:::info[Your friendly neighborhood Kubernetes]

> Make sure you have a Kubernetes cluster running locally. Some good options include [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/), [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/), [k3s](https://k3s.io/), or [k0s](https://k0sproject.io/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure you have a Kubernetes cluster running and API access to run `helm` and `kubectl` commands. Some good local options include [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/), [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/), [k3s](https://k3s.io/), or [k0s](https://k0sproject.io/).
```

Just a suggestion in case folks want to run this in the cloud!

:::

A wasmCloud installation requires a few things to run:

- **[NATS](/docs/ecosystem/nats/)** (with Jetstream enabled)
- **[wasmCloud Application Deployment Manager (wadm)](/docs/ecosystem/wadm/)** connected to NATS

If you're not sure what that means, don't worry: the following steps will help you deploy the prerequisites to your Kubernetes cluster, then deploy the operator.

#### 1. Deploy prerequisites

First we'll add the NATS Helm repo. If you're not familiar with it, NATS is the open source connective technology that wasmCloud uses to create a unified topology across any number of environments. 

```shell
helm repo add nats https://nats-io.github.io/k8s/helm/charts/
```
Next install the upstream NATS Helm chart:

```shell
helm upgrade --install -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wasmCloud/wasmcloud-operator/main/examples/quickstart/nats-values.yaml nats nats/nats
```

> Deploy wadm to your Kubernetes cluster with a Helm chart hosted by wasmCloud. 

Reviewer 3: Replace period with colon

```shell
helm install wadm -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wasmCloud/wasmcloud-operator/main/examples/quickstart/wadm-values.yaml oci://ghcr.io/wasmcloud/charts/wadm
```
You can validate the installations with:

```shell

> kubectl rollout status deploy,sts -l app.kubernetes.io/instance=nats

Reviewer 4: Technically you should do this before you deploy `wadm`, because wadm will fail to start until NATS is deployed, but since Kubernetes takes care of restarting the pod until it does, it's also fine to do this.

kubectl rollout status deploy -l app.kubernetes.io/instance=wadm
```
Once NATS and wadm are ready, you can move on to deploy the operator.

#### 2. Deploy the operator

To deploy the operator:

```shell
kubectl apply -k https://github.com/wasmCloud/wasmcloud-operator/deploy/base
```

> Validate the installation by checking that the pods are ready...

Reviewer 3: Consider making consistent with colon

```shell
kubectl rollout status deploy -l app=wasmcloud-operator -n wasmcloud-operator
```
...and confirming that the API service is available:
```shell
kubectl get apiservices.apiregistration.k8s.io v1beta1.core.oam.dev
```

#### 3. Create wasmCloud hosts

Our final step is to apply the `wasmcloud-host` manifest:

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wasmCloud/wasmcloud-operator/main/examples/quickstart/wasmcloud-host.yaml
```
Check the status of your wasmCloud host:

```shell
kubectl describe wasmcloudhostconfig wasmcloud-host
```

At this point, you're up and running. Let's try running some WebAssembly components with our new wasmCloud installation. 

#### Run a WebAssembly component on Kubernetes

> When you `kubectl apply` a [wasmCloud application manifest](../../docs/ecosystem/wadm/model), the cluster will automatically provision the component workload with wasmCloud. We'll use the [`hello-world-application.yaml` manifest](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wasmCloud/wasmcloud-operator/main/examples/quickstart/hello-world-application.yaml) included in the operator's quickstart.

Reviewer 4: It might be nice to mention/link to the application that's being deployed in the `wasmcloud/wasmcloud` repository, so that in case someone is curious (or suspicious) as to what the application is that we're deploying, they can see the source code: https://github.com/wasmCloud/wasmCloud/tree/main/examples/rust/components/http-hello-world

Before we launch the application, let's take a quick look at an excerpt of the manifest:

```yaml {7-7}
...
spec:
  components:
    - name: http-component
      type: component
      properties:
        image: ghcr.io/wasmcloud/components/http-hello-world-rust:0.1.0
...
```

> On line 7, you can see that we're deploying our component from an image. Specifically, the component is packaged as an OCI image. These aren't containers, but pure components conforming to OCI standards&mdash;meaning you can use the same registry for component images that you're already using for container images. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
On line 7, you can see that we're deploying our component from an image. Specifically, the component is packaged as an OCI artifact. These aren't containers, but pure components conforming to OCI standards&mdash;meaning you can use the same registry for component artifacts that you're already using for container images. 
```

Now run `kubectl apply`: 

```shell
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wasmCloud/wasmcloud-operator/main/examples/quickstart/hello-world-application.yaml
```

Now we can check the deployment status:

```shell
kubectl get application
```
```shell
APPLICATION   DEPLOYED VERSION   LATEST VERSION   STATUS
hello-world   v0.0.1             v0.0.1           Deployed
```

### Manage applications with wash

Now let's port-forward into the NATS service running in our Kubernetes cluster. (Note: `4222` is the port for the NATS service, `4223` is the port for NATS websockets.)

```shell
kubectl port-forward svc/nats 4222:4222 4223:4223
```
Now you can connect to wasmCloud on Kubernetes with your local wash toolchain:

```shell
wash app list
```

> Finally, here is our hello world component running on the Kubernetes cluster, manageable via our local `wash` CLI.

Reviewer 3: Consider making consistent with a colon - a tiny thing

```shell
Name          Latest Version   Deployed Version   Deploy Status  Description                                                                                                  
hello-world   v0.0.1           v0.0.1                  Deployed  HTTP hello world demo in Rust, using the WebAssembly Component Model and WebAssembly Interfaces Types (WIT)
```

Success! If you prefer video, you can [watch a quickstart walkthrough of this entire process on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/embed/239Q_hAKqPw?si=y0nHeFHfCPOdItNU&amp;start=235&amp;end=1000):

> <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/239Q_hAKqPw?si=y0nHeFHfCPOdItNU&amp;start=235&amp;end=1000" title="wasmCloud on Kubernetes tutorial" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<YouTube url="https://www.youtube.com/embed/239Q_hAKqPw?si=y0nHeFHfCPOdItNU&amp;start=235&amp;end=1000" />
```

```
Check the status of your wasmCloud host:

```shell
kubectl describe wasmcloudhostconfig wasmcloud-host
```

At this point, you're up and running. Let's try running some WebAssembly components with our new wasmCloud installation. 

#### Run a WebAssembly component on Kubernetes

When you `kubectl apply` a [wasmCloud application manifest](../../docs/ecosystem/wadm/model), the cluster will automatically provision the component workload with wasmCloud. We'll use the [`hello-world-application.yaml` manifest](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/wasmCloud/wasmcloud-operator/main/examples/quickstart/hello-world-application.yaml) included in the operator's quickstart. (You can check out the [source code for the application itself](https://github.com/wasmCloud/wasmCloud/tree/main/examples/rust/components/http-hello-world) in the wasmCloud monorepo.)

Before we launch the application, let's take a quick look at an excerpt of the manifest:

```yaml {7-7}
...
spec:
  components:
    - name: http-component
      type: component
      properties:
        image: ghcr.io/wasmcloud/components/http-hello-world-rust:0.1.0
...
```

> On line 7, you can see that we're deploying our component from an image. Specifically, the component is packaged as an OCI artifact. These aren't containers, but pure components conforming to OCI standards&mdash;meaning you can use the same registry for component artifacts that you're already using for container images. 

Reviewer 4: I realize this is nitpicky, but I suppose it's an opportunity to teach folks about the Wasm OCI Artifact:
```suggestion
On line 7, you can see that we're deploying our component from an OCI artifact. Specifically, the component is packaged as a [Wasm OCI artifact](https://tag-runtime.cncf.io/wgs/wasm/deliverables/wasm-oci-artifact/). These aren't containers, but pure components conforming to OCI standards&mdash;meaning you can use the same registry for component artifacts that you're already using for container images. 
```

Reviewer 4: You're most welcome to leave this nuance out if it doesn't make sense here, I just figured that it could be nice to link readers to the definition in case they are interested to learn more or hadn't heard of this development yet
